+++
title = "focus"
author = ["Wanderson Ferreira"]
date = 2024-09-15T00:00:00-03:00
slug = "/home/bartuka/code/roam/notes/20240615110814-focus"
tags = ["publish", "foundational"]
draft = false
+++

focus is the ability to carefully pay attention to something such as a task or a
person. it requires a lot of [concentration]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240615110808-concentration.md" >}}).

also, in the world of [sport psycology]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240614214250-sport_psychologist.md" >}}), focus is a critical skill that must
be mastered by all athletes that desire to exceed in their role. for my
particular scenario at the moment, which is [running]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240628153132-running.md" >}}), there are some key
moments that i need to focus on the task at hand:

1.  run [race]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240619104543-race.md" >}})s regularly
2.  keep a [long run]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240711215736-long_run.md" >}}) every week
3.  do the workouts regularly

it is very important to keep myself concentrated and [present]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240622054653-present.md" >}}) in the moment
when i am realizing these activities. therefore, i do not listen to music,
podcasts, etc. i try to minimize all [distractions]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240622054034-distractions.md" >}}) that i can [control]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240712185744-control.md" >}}). the main
ideal of this [cleaner]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240717160403-cleaner.md" >}}) environment is to be able to **focus on the signals
that my [body]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240720094206-body.md" >}}) provides me** at every step.

i already noticed that keeping ourselves focused is a arduous task. it is
difficult to keep concentrate in a task of 1 or 2hrs of duration. however, there
are long term objectives that requires daily focus such as keeping ourself
following the [diet]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240614220717-diet.md" >}}) plan to reach the desired [body composition]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240915160606-body_composition.md" >}}) to
[perform]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240615104929-performance.md" >}}) the way we desire at some event or circunstance.

therefore, for these situations it is important to rely on short term goals to
keep us in the correct track:

1.  weekly mileage
    -   **Me at 2024-08-26**: want to reach 80km per week
2.  monthly mileage
3.  more consistent with strength [training]({{< relref "../roam/notes/20240615170107-training.md" >}}) and stretching

these below are more in-depth analysis of the types of focus that we experience.


## short term {#short-term}


## medium term {#medium-term}


## long term {#long-term}
