+++
title = "meditation"
author = ["Wanderson Ferreira"]
date = 2024-06-22T00:00:00-03:00
slug = "/home/bartuka/code/roam/notes/20240622060436-meditation"
tags = ["publish"]
draft = false
+++

the word meditation has become more and more common. everyone wants a quieter
mind so they can make better [decision]({{< relref "20240611231243-decision.md" >}})s and improve [focus]({{< relref "20240615110814-focus.md" >}}).

there are different kinds of meditations:

-   [zen meditation]({{< relref "20240720092837-zen_meditation.md" >}})
-   [tibetan meditation]({{< relref "20240720092845-tibetan_meditation.md" >}})
-   [indian meditation]({{< relref "20240720092851-indian_meditation.md" >}})

why one should medidate and what is the significance of meditation?

purposes of why people are trying to [practice]({{< relref "20240622061935-practice.md" >}}) it nowadays:

-   [enlightenment]({{< relref "20240622221205-enlightenment.md" >}})
-   peace of mind
-   better understanding of themselves

we need to question things, it is good to have [doubt]({{< relref "20240717094527-doubt.md" >}}), to be [skeptical]({{< relref "20240720093156-skeptical.md" >}}) up to
a certain point.

> meditation is not something you do
> meditation is something entirely, and moviment into the whole question into our living
> how we live, how we behave, whether we have fears, anxieties, sorrows, or if we
> are pursuing pleasure, whether we have built images of ourselves and others.
>
> this is part of our life and in the understanding of that life and of those
> various issues involved in live and in being [free]({{< relref "20240624214308-freedom.md" >}}) from those.
>
> Krishnamurti

<!--quoteend-->

> when you say medidation you need to understand that this is not something you
> can **DO** because you **CAN** become meditative, you CAN become medidation, but never
> do it... it is a certain **QUALIFY**.
>
> medidation is something that blossom within you!
>
> if you cultivate your [body]({{< relref "20240720094206-body.md" >}})
> if you cultivate your [mind]({{< relref "20240720094219-mind.md" >}})
> if you cultivate your [emotion]({{< relref "20240620224037-emotion.md" >}})
> if you cultivate your [energy]({{< relref "20240720094256-energy.md" >}})
> to a certain level of preparedness, then meditation will blossom within you.
>
> Sadhguru Jaggi Vasudev

<!--quoteend-->

> the real purpose of meditation is to have fundamental [insights]({{< relref "20240803091510-insights.md" >}}) into the nature
> of your [mind]({{< relref "20240720094219-mind.md" >}}) - insights that change your whole approach to [life]({{< relref "20240612233042-life.md" >}})
>
> Sam Harris


## apps I tried about meditation {#apps-i-tried-about-meditation}

-   headspace: didn't like it .. but it triggered a deeper search on which app
    should i try
-   [waking up app]({{< relref "20240720091551-waking_up_app.md" >}})


## don't medidate because it's good for you {#don-t-medidate-because-it-s-good-for-you}

this is a small audio from Sam Haris on waking up about this. there are deeper
reasons to have an [examined life]({{< relref "20240723082722-examined_life.md" >}}) other than "doing it just because is good for
your health"

free your attention from all the trivial things around us
