---
title: "role of software"
author: ["Wanderson Ferreira"]
date: 2022-01-04T00:00:00-03:00
tags: ["software"]
draft: false
---

Businesses have real challenging requirements and most of this difficulty is not
directly tied up with the actual implementation of these requirements -- they
are straightforward, however **accounting for changes** is the tricky part and
often misunderstood.

We live in an ever changing **environment**, but the rate of change is high from
either business or technology perspectives. I had the pleasure to work with
smart business people and often felt their despair when they explained a new
feature or a new pivoting in the product and the tech department went mad by
thinking about how would they do that?

When a smart team wants to account for **flexibility** and to be able to change at
will the underlying implementation, the last resort is **parametrization** which is
basically deferring some decisions to **runtime**. (ofc, let's assume you have good
abstractions already in-place in your code)

```clojure
;; FIXME
;; Of course I am oversimplifying, everybody knows that a well defined context map
;; created in partnership with THE great domain experts who knows all the answers,
;; using microservices running on top of a service mesh exchanging well-defined
;; messages can quickly perform any task at hand.
```

Often all of the effort works well enough for small scale flexibility, but if
you listen carefully to how some business people talk about their products and
visions the level of change can vary drastically.

In the Clojure community we have a known term called [PLOP](https://www.infoq.com/presentations/Value-Values/) or "Place-Oriented
programming" which is to finding the correct place to **add/remove/read/write**
**data/code** where it must then live from now on in the way you wrote/designed.

However, the correct place can only be known at the time of implementation which
means almost right now if you consider a time frame of 5 to 10 years. Another
aspect of PLOP is a careful coordination between all the code to make it work.

Very small trivia example, today we know that a piece of data from real world is
represented by 3 fields. We promptly write a function that accepts this data and
return the meaningful answer 42.

```clojure
(def real-world-data
  {:name "Wand",
   :yob "1991",
   :status "puzzled"})

(my-important-business-logic real-world-data)
;;=> 42
```

Tomorrow, the world will change and we will receive a new piece of data:

```clojure
(def real-world-tomorrow-data
  {:name "Wand",
   :city "SP",
   :idea "none",
   :yob "1991",
   :weird/value-we-never-saw "Look for good questions, answers are generally boring"
   :status "puzzled"})
```

Why this should break your code? It's the same thing in disguise.

But if your code strictly depends on what you know right now how can you be
prepared to deal with the future without eventually throwing everything away? We
can have a good feeling about how space is the predominant axis for developers
when we look at our tooling: IDEs, testing frameworks, snapshots in general,
etc.

We are used to look at the code in static snapshots, so we can make sense of it,
we can go back in time, but that's all that is. Even understanding how the past
contributed to the present is very difficult.

Based on Bret Victor's excellent talk [Inventing on Principle](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PUv66718DII), I like to think
that I am close to find a good principle to dedicate some work into it. **Time**.
Software on time. Aristotle created a concept called "aporía" which means
difficulty, logical impasse, contradiction, and thinking about time quickly
converge to this concept.

But not all is lost, Computer Science have many attempts to investigate the
nature of our Place-Oriented Programming models and maybe this was inherited
from early on. The following paper from John Backus is a very interesting read
[Can programming be liberated from the nov Neumann style?](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1283920.1283933).

There are many places to look and definitely some communities are more aligned
than others, however the daily basis of our work and the tendency for
[bikeshedding](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RvBX05gCZAw) can be very distracting. I would like to finish this post with a
quote from How Buildings Learn:

> Buildings have often been studies whole in space, but never before have they
> been studied whole in time.... the book proposes that buildings adapt best when
> constantly refined and reshaped by their occupants, and that **architects can
> mature from being artists of space to becoming artists of time**.
