:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       5b26ce02-5f52-4631-9a12-7de2220bcf00
:END:
#+TITLE: five things you notice when you quit the news
#+hugo_lastmod: Time-stamp: <2022-05-06 13:33:37 wferreir>
#+hugo_tags: "raw-page"

[[/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#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][//Email]]

34K Shares

{ comments closed }

[[https://www.raptitude.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/munchnews.jpg]]
I grew up believing that following the news makes you a better citizen.
Eight years after having quit, that idea now seems ridiculous---that
consuming a particularly unimaginative information product on a daily
basis somehow makes you thoughtful and informed in a way that benefits
society.

But I still encounter people who balk at the possibility of a smart,
engaged adult quitting the daily news.

To be clear, I'm mostly talking about following TV and internet
newscasts here. This post isn't an indictment of journalism as a whole.
There's a big difference between watching a half hour of CNN's refugee
crisis coverage (not that they cover it anymore) versus spending that
time reading a 5,000-word article on the same topic.

If you quit, even for just a month or so, the news-watching habit might
start to look quite ugly and unnecessary to you, not unlike how a smoker
only notices how bad tobacco makes things smell once he stops lighting
up.

A few things you might notice, if you take a break:

*** 1) *You feel better*
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: you-feel-better
:END:
A common symptom of quitting the news is an improvement in mood. News
junkies will say it's because you've stuck your head in the sand.

But that assumes the news is the equivalent of having your head out in
the fresh, clear air. They don't realize that what you can glean about
the world from the news isn't even close to a representative sample of
what is happening in the world.

The news isn't interested in creating an accurate sample. They select
for what's 1) unusual, 2) awful, and 3) probably going to be popular. So
the idea that you can get a meaningful sense of the “state of the world”
by watching the news is absurd.

Their selections exploit our
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negativity_bias][negativity bias]].
We've evolved to pay more attention to what's scary and infuriating, but
that doesn't mean every instance of fear or anger is useful. Once you've
quit watching, it becomes obvious that it is a primary aim of news
reports---not an incidental side-effect---to agitate and dismay the
viewer.

What appears on the news is not “The conscientious person's portfolio of
concerns”. What appears is whatever sells, and what sells is fear, and
contempt for other groups of people.

Curate your own portfolio. You can get better information about the
world from deeper sources, who took more than a half-day to put it
together.

*** 2) You were never actually accomplishing anything by watching the
news*
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: you-were-never-actually-accomplishing-anything-by-watching-the-news
:END:
If you ask someone what they accomplish by watching the news, you'll
hear vague notions like, “It's our civic duty to stay informed!” or “I
need to know what's going on in the world,” or “We can't just ignore
these issues,” none of which answer the question.

“Being informed” sounds like an accomplishment, but it implies that any
information will do. You can become informed by reading a bus schedule.

A month after you've quit the news, it's hard to name anything useful
that's been lost. It becomes clear that those years of news-watching
amounted to virtually nothing in terms of improvement to your quality of
life, lasting knowledge, or your ability to help others. And that's to
say nothing of the opportunity cost. Imagine if you spent that time
learning a language, or reading books and essays about some of the
issues they mention on the news.

You'll find that your abstinence did not result in any worse cabinet
appointments than were already being made, and that disaster relief
efforts carried on without your involvement, just as they always do. As
it turns out, your hobby of monitoring the “state of the world” did not
actually affect the world.

We have inherited from somewhere---maybe from the era when there was
only an hour of news available a day---the belief that having a
superficial awareness of the day's most popular issues is somehow
helpful to those most affected by them.

*** 3) Most current-events-related conversations are just people
talking out of their asses*
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: most-current-events-related-conversations-are-just-people-talking-out-of-their-asses
:END:
“Because it helps you participate in everyday conversations!” is a weak
but at least meaningful answer to the “What is accomplished” question.
But when you quit playing the current events game, and observe others
talking about them, you might notice that almost nobody really knows
what they're talking about.

There is an extraordinary gulf between having a functional understanding
of an issue, and the cursory glance you get from the news. If you ever
come across a water-cooler conversation on a topic you happen to know a
lot about, you see right through the emperor's clothes. It's kind of
hilarious how willing people are to speak boldly on issues they've known
about for all of three hours.

It feels good to make cutting remarks and take hard stands, even when
we're wrong, and the news gives us perfect fodder for that. The less you
know about an issue, the easier it is to make bold proclamations about
it, because at newscast-distance it still looks black and white enough
that you can feel certain about what needs to happen next.

Maybe the last thing the world needs is another debate on Issue X
between two people who learned about it from a newscast---at least if
we're trying to /improve/ relationships between people from different
groups.

*** 4) There are much better ways to “be informed”*
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: there-are-much-better-ways-to-be-informed
:END:
We all want to live in a well-informed society. The news does inform
people, but I don't think it informs people particularly /well./

There are loads of sources of “information”. The back of your shampoo
bottle contains information. Today there's much more of it out there
than we can ever absorb, so we have to choose what deserves our time.
The news provides information in infinite volume but very limited depth,
and it's clearly meant to agitate us more than educate us.

Every minute spent watching news is a minute you are unavailable for
learning about the world in other ways. Americans probably watch a
hundred million hours of news coverage every /day./ That's a lot of
unread books, for one thing.

Read three books on a topic and you know more about it than 99% of the
world. Watch news all day for years and you have a distant,
water-cooler-level awareness of thousands of stories, at least for the
few weeks each is popular.

If we only care about the breadth of information, and not the depth,
there's not much distinction between “staying informed” and staying
misinformed.

*** 5) “Being concerned” makes us feel like we're doing something when
we're not*
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: being-concerned-makes-us-feel-like-were-doing-something-when-were-not
:END:
News is all about injustice and catastrophe, and naturally we feel
uncomfortable ignoring stories in which people are being hurt. As
superficial as TV newscasts can be, the issues reported in them are
(usually) real. Much more real than they can ever seem through a
television. People are suffering and dying, all the time, and to ignore
a depiction of any of that suffering, even a cynical and manipulative
depiction, makes us feel guilty.

The least we can do is not ignore it, we think. So we watch it on TV,
with wet eyes and lumps in our throats. But staying at this level of
“concerned” isn't really helping anyone, except maybe to alleviate our
own guilt a bit.

And I wonder if there's a kind of “substitution effect” at work here.
The sense of “at least I care” may actually prevent us from doing
something concrete to help, because by watching sympathetically we don't
quite have to confront the reality that we're doing absolutely nothing
about it.

Watching disasters unfold, even while we do nothing, at least /feels/ a
little more compassionate than switching off. The truth is that the vast
majority of us will provide absolutely no help to the victims of almost
all of the atrocities that happen in this world, televised or not. And
that's hard to accept. But if we can at least /show/ concern, even to
ourselves, we don't quite have accept that. We can remain uninvolved
without feeling uninvolved.

This may be the biggest reason we fear turning off the news. And it
might be the best reason to do it.

Have you quit the news? What did you notice?
