:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       246204ce-b9bd-4659-baa0-13d4ec32ca92
:END:
#+TITLE: research as understanding
#+hugo_lastmod: Time-stamp: <2022-05-22 21:18:59 wferreir>
#+hugo_tags: knowledge note raw-page bookmark

October 17, 2021

I misunderstood the nature of research for most of my life, and this
prevented me from doing any. I thought significant research came from
following the scientific method until novel discoveries popped out. I'd
never contributed something new to human knowledge before, so being a
researcher---which required replicating this outcome---felt impossibly
far out of reach.

But it turns out the novel discovery is just a side effect. You don't
make novel discoveries by trying to make novel discoveries.

Instead, research is simply a continuation of something we already
naturally do: learning. Learning happens when you understand something
that /someone else already understands/. Research happens when you
understand something that /nobody else understands yet/.

[[https://res.cloudinary.com/djp21wtxm/image/upload/v1634487951/dv24ydqlrkscrxo44r0k.png]]
This hit me during COVID quarantine when I escaped to the mountains of
Santa Fe to learn probability theory from a dear mathematician friend.
He began by asking me to teach him something simple, like combinatorics.
I said that seemed pointless, as certainly he already knew
combinatorics, but he assured me he'd forgotten much and that it'd help.
I nervously brushed up, preparing. As I began whiteboarding, he started
asking questions, and pretty soon I felt like he was actually learning
from me---/exhilarating/.

At some point, he asked a question about multinomial distributions I
couldn't answer. I realized I wouldn't be able to find the answer in any
textbook or paper, and in fact, if we wanted the answer, we'd have to
work it out ourselves. We hunkered down and began playing with the
problem. A day later, having filled the whiteboard several times over, I
understood multinomial distributions far more deeply than I ever
imagined I would.^{1}

Offhand, mired in the complexity of the problem, he remarked: "Honestly,
I don't think humanity knows the answer to this question yet."

Wow. I felt as if my whole life I'd been hiking in a dense fog-ridden
forest and suddenly stumbled upon a lush valley saturated with sunshine
and stunning clarity. /This/ was research. I wasn't straining to
discover something new. I was accidentally doing it because I was
curious, because my friend had asked a question I couldn't answer and it
seemed nobody else had figured it out either.

Research, I realized, is what happens as a /byproduct/ when you try to
understand something and hit the bounds of what humanity currently
knows.^{2} At that point, there's suddenly no one who
can tell you the answer.

If you care enough about the question, you have to figure out how to
answer it yourself, and that's when you start running experiments and
developing hypotheses. That rote process of science we're taught in
school---to start with a question, generate hypotheses, test with
experiments, draw conclusions---it's a good tool, but it doesn't capture
the most important element: actually wanting to know the answer to the
question!

When our goal is to understand something, we start getting curious: why
does this work this way, and not that way? Why doesn't this do what I
expected? Strange! These observations of strangeness, where pieces of
the understanding puzzle don't fit, lead to exploring beyond what's
known.

In retrospect, this seems a bit obvious, especially if I imagine Newton
or Darwin. I doubt they went around asking: "What new thing can I
discover?" Rather, they made incredibly detailed observations about what
confused them and tried very hard to piece together the laws that
described what was going on. At some point, after having gone
extraordinarily deep in an uncharted direction, they were each able to
turn their understanding into an explanatory model, resulting in a
tremendous novel discovery. While from the outside, we believe the
discovery to be a magical eureka moment---an apple falling on Newton's
head---from the inside, it feels more like a painstaking process of
incrementally deeper understanding.

Put another way, the generating function for novel work is trying really
hard to deeply understand something until you pass through the edge of
current human understanding, and then continuing imaginatively onwards.

Of course, that understanding needs to be augmented with a model of
what's already known. Without such a model, you may think you're
discovering new things at the edge, but you're actually in the center
rediscovering what's known. With a good model, in many areas it's
amazing how quickly you shoot beyond the edge.^{3}

When we see research as a process of understanding rather than a process
of producing novel discoveries^{4} it becomes clear
that many curious, bright people who don't believe they can be
researchers already have the foundational skills needed. We're naturally
curious; we already know how to learn, how to notice when something
doesn't make sense. We ask questions, and we work out the answer. At
some point, we'll ask questions where nobody has the answer. At that
point, we're starting to do research.^{5}

Viewed as a way to understand reality more deeply, suddenly research
shifts from something intimidating to something beautiful, this process
of slowly feeling the inner workings of the universe come into focus,
clicking into place, a blossoming of clarity suffusing, igniting the
jungle of neurons traversing my mind, until I can finally /see/.

* Footnotes
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: footnotes
:END:
[1] This required a big mentality shift from the habits I internalized
in school---I had to repeatedly squash my urge to "just understand
things /enough/" (enough for the test, of course) and move on. That
externally-motivated approach to understanding blocked my ability to
play with the problem. The playfulness came from /inside/, from
curiosity, enjoyment, humor, amazement.

[2] I used to model understanding as a data download, a process of
writing what people already knew into my brain. Now I realize that it's
a /creative/ process, a process of actively constructing explanations of
how things work.

[3] Note that under this definition, many things we think of as research
would not be considered research! For example, publishing papers looks
like research, but in machine learning, many papers get higher
performance on a benchmark but don't necessarily increment our
understanding. I'm not clear on whether this is an advantage or a
shortcoming of this definition. ¯\/(ツ)//¯

[4] Ph.D. advisors are helpful because the good ones are essentially a
walking model of what's known, which makes finding the edge much easier.
There are some additional interesting questions here, like: how do you
get to the edge quickly? How do you do that across multiple fields? What
do you do if the field seems misdirected, like much of psychology? At
some point I'd like to write more about this, so if you have any
thoughts, please send them my way :)

[5] There are two more general lessons here: first, not understanding
how any given process works reduces your sense of agency, and it's worth
identifying other such black boxes in your mind. And second, it's common
to mistakenly set the outcome of a process as your goal, as I did by
believing I should try to make novel discoveries. The thing to emulate
is the process, not the outcome.

--------------

/*Thank you Josh Albrecht, Laura Deming, Sneha Shah Jain, Michael
Nielsen, and Erik Torenberg* for many helpful insights and comments on
drafts of this essay, and *thank you Sebastien Zany* for prompting this
insight about research in the beautiful mountains of Santa Fe./

--------------
